![A concrete path leads down a hill. There is snow on either side, and mountains are in the background.](path.avif "The paved trail I take to campus every day. Not a spectacular view, but not bad either.")

Every weekday morning, I wake up, make breakfast, and bike to school. It's one
of my most enjoyable routines. In this post, I'll explain why biking has been a
highlight of my semester, and I'll also try to convince you that it's worth
living close enough to work or school that you can bike.

The ride is pleasant. I live about 20 minutes from campus. Conveniently, a
network of low-traffic residential roads and paved trails extends almost the
whole way there. As luck would have it, this route also consists only of
gradual uphill or downhill stretches with the exception of one short climb that
allows me to feel like I'm actually getting real cardio. The cool January air
invigorates my mind on the way to school and clears it on the way back. Though
sometimes patches of ice lie in my way, it's nothing my mountain bike can't
handle, as long as I'm not reckless. Often I wave to the broad demographic of
other Golden residents who share my enjoyment of exercising outdoors. If I'm
paying attention, sometimes I'll see birds flitting among the bushes, looking
for a patch of sunlight.

My morning bike rides also make me feel present. Most of us have heard at some
point that exercise is good for mental health. I haven't formally researched
this, but anecdotally, it seems to be true. In a car, I watch the trees sliding
by on the other side of the glass. I must be content to play the role of an
observer. But when my legs are pumping the pedals in the highest gear, sending
me flying over the bumps in the concrete, the wind rushing against my face,
that's when I can be *part* of the world. Humans are meant to experience, not
to simply behold, and biking is a great way to habitualize that.

The merits of biking, however, are not confined to the soul. I save $25/month
on gas money alone, not counting trips to places besides school. I reduce my
greenhouse gas emissions. I save 40 minutes a day by parallelizing exercise and
commuting. (And besides, it's not like I would be disciplined enough to go to
the gym daily if I didn't bike.)

The few problems a bike commute does impose are easily handled. The danger is
mitigated by living in a place where I can mostly take residential roads and
trails, by choosing to use the sidewalk for the brief unavoidable stretch of
major road, and by making a habit of wearing my helmet. The cold is overcome by
purchasing high-quality winter gloves and packing a pair of sweat pants in my
backpack. The extra 10 minutes compared to a car commute are a small
inconvenience with sufficient time management, and parking is so much easier
that I probably get most of that time back.

So, what do I gain from biking instead of driving? I'm happier and more in
shape. When lunchtime rolls around, I find myself hungrier than usual, in the
most delightful way. I don't have to refuel my car or change its oil. (In fact,
I don't own a car at all.) In short, I reap large mental, physical, and
financial benefits by making small compromises. If any of my readers live close
to work or school and are able-bodied enough to ride a bike, I'd highly
recommend it over a car.
