![piles of boxes labeled Pre-AP strewn across a computer lab](pre_ap_cesspool.avif "Thousands of Pre-AP booklets staged for sorting in my old high school library. Possibly the saddest photograph I have ever captured.")

I'm a second-year undergrad at the Colorado School of Mines, and I haven't
thought about my SAT score for ages. In fact, I've forgotten what it was. I
also couldn't tell you how many AP classes I took, or how many 5s I earned from
them. My high school academic endeavors saved me credits, and therefore money,
but they don't affect my day-to-day life. Despite this, during the month before
I published this essay, millions of high school students reached their highest
stress levels of the year taking AP exams and turning in IB papers. For many of
these students, there's an immense discrepancy between how much we prioritize
academics in high school and how much they actually matter. Why are we doing
this to ourselves?

In 11th or 12th grade—I can't remember which—I found myself sitting in an
unfamiliar high school with truly impressive amounts of mucus cascading from my
nostrils. This circumstance was especially awkward because I was in a room full
of other students taking the SAT. I'd already taken it, but I was trying again,
unsatisfied with my previous score, and no mere cold was going to prevent me
from improving. Unsure how to discreetly extract the snot with an
already-soaked tissue, I attempted to use the tissue as a glove while pinching
the albumen-like liquid and pulling away from my face. This was comically
ineffective. A proctor noticed and offered me more tissues.

Gross, right? But not nearly as disgusting as the inane grindset imposed on
high school students by corporate entities like the College Board and
reinforced by society's obsessive veneration for the top 1% of postsecondary
education institutions. Many of my classmates spent their high school years
overemphasizing the idea of getting into a "good college." Anything less than
an A was a calamity. Some extracurriculars were taken up for enjoyment; others
were chosen to lengthen the lists in our Common App accounts. On Reddit, we
could find more extreme versions of ourselves jokingly [offering to exchange
their firstborn
children](https://www.reddit.com/r/APStudents/comments/14qsvh0/comment/jqpv9a9)
for 5s on their AP exams. *Our main focus should be acceptance into an elite
university,* we subconsciously assured ourselves. *After that, our path to
wealth and happiness is secured.*

Wealth and success stem from attitude, ideals, and unfortunately, other factors
outside your control. However, those factors are mostly independent of which
university you attend. Life is not measured by test scores, grades, or some
other numerical proxy for worthiness, but is rather guided by intangibles like
discovering what brings you fulfillment, spending time with people close to
you, practicing skills you'll need for your career, and enjoying opportunities
that won't come again. High school develops those intangibles; allowing college
worries to overshadow them oversimplifies the purpose of high school.

The misunderstanding of purpose extends to college, too. In high school, it's
easy to become so focused on college apps that you forget why you are applying
in the first place. Most people, once they understand their motivations clearly
enough to articulate them, will find that a lesser-known local school can meet
their needs just as well as a prestigious one. Both enable you to enter a field
that requires a degree, to discover the joy of spending four years with other
young people, or simply to act on your belief that education is intrinsically
valuable. All these universal rewards are more important than the
university-specific ones.

Of course, some universities are undoubtedly better than others. Compared to me
at Mines, an undergraduate with the same major at MIT will enjoy a
much-improved networking profile which will probably lead to a higher-paying
job. They'll also have more research opportunities, sponsored by a larger
endowment. I confess that I'd be going to an elite university now if I had been
accepted to one. But if earning these benefits equates to spending class time
and free time on increasing numbers rather than learning, it all becomes very
difficult to justify.

This doesn't mean things like grades or the SAT are unimportant. I'm only
stressing that they instantly lose their importance the moment you submit your
enrollment deposit. In contrast, other high school pursuits cultivate personal
growth, an asset whose importance never fades.

So, if any overachieving high school students have happened upon this little
essay, I ask you to use your last pre-college years well. You'll never get to
go to high school again. You'll never get to be a teenager again. Don't burden
yourself with relatively short-term concerns. Go do stuff. Make the most of it.
